MANIFEST OF LINE
Piet Mondrian is an outstanding Dutch artist of the 20th century, one of the founders and theorists of abstract art, the author of neoplasticism.
The idea of the presence in the real world of invisible, but incredibly strong spiritual energies, which can only be conveyed with the help of the simplest geometric shapes, followed him throughout his creative life. The artist believed that high art should be the voice of pure spirituality, extremely purely and clearly reflecting the objective laws of the universe.
Art historians state that among three founders of abstract art (W. Kandinsky, P. Mondrian, K. Malevich), Mondrian turned out to be the most consistent and purposeful. However, Mondrian tries to find something unchanging in the same motive, namely, the structure of the lines, the genuine primary shape.
"Intuitively," Mondrian would write later, "I understood that painting must find a new approach to reflect the perfection of the nature, I felt that a living reality can be expressed only through pure plastic lines.
Through such simple geometric forms, the artist seeks to reproduce the true image of the world around, independent from accidents and subjective perceptions, to determine the boundaries and shape of the artistic image, to display the fundamental laws, governing the Universe, to express the idea of universal harmony. "Neoplasticism," wrote Mondrian, "asserts justice, because the equality of plastic means in the composition indicated that everyone can be equal among equals."
By the middle of the 20th century, Corbusier will show the dominance of curvilinear shapes. The Malevich's student, Vladimir Vasilievich Sterligov, opens the dome bowl shape.
In one of his last paintings "Swallowtail", Salvador Dali depicts an arch and writes that his creative search led to the lines and an arch.
In the painting "The Bull" by Pablo Picasso, lines are traced in the shape of an arch.
In final paintings of Joan Miro, lines are traced in an arch along the vertical. In the Piet Mondrian's painting "Tree", we can notice a clear search for linear shapes.
They believed that the straight line divides, whereas the curve unites.
Having studied the theory and practice of many modernist movements, such as Cubism, Futurism, Fauvism, Abstractionism, Neoplasticism, Rayonism, Minimalism, Conceptualism and others. I believe that I got closer to the answer raised by Mondrian - how to achieve pure plastic line expressiveness, I see a primary constant element in the line.
The plastic language of lines is absolute. The next step is to bring them to a rhythmic compositional unity with the help of symmetries and the principle of linear shapes' arch that I have discovered. Relying on the entire artistic heritage, gazing at my own classical Kazakh folk art, I build my "steppe philosophy", the philosophy of the linearity of its structure, which is dictated by a number of reasons, including the space of the steppe itself.
In researching this process, the study of scientific research and modern scientists really helped me.
One of the supporters of this idea is Masaru Emoto the Japanese researcher. He conducted a series of experiments, affecting on water with spoken or written words. In general, the idea was as follows - next to the water some emotional word was pronounced, for example, "fool" or "clever", and then they looked at what shape the water crystals would take. According to the experimenter, with a negative impact on water, its crystals were misshapened, and with a positive one, on the contrary, symmetrical.
Christian icons, Buddhist mandalas and other spiritual symbols are based on symmetry.
In that regard, I want to say that the time has come to recreate the cult of symmetry in the depictive context.
I am deeply engrossed in a thought of creating a new philosophy of the Great Steppe in art, creating another plastic language across the line in symmetry.
Even in Kazakh yurt, symmetrical ornaments are used, which shaped the right consciousness of our ancestors.
Guided by spiritual goals, I believe that painting should be a form of meditation, not emotions in a painting.
The predominantly vertical development of the elements of cosmic structure of our Universe I took from the past cultural experience of humankind: the entire previous history of development strived to build the harmony of this world from the depths of the Universe, the information field of which was based on the "Divine vertical".
This approach was driven by my conviction that emphasizes the spiritual unity of all humankind, reflecting a universal approach to the world. In my paintings I try to show meditative plastic in the smoothness of flowing lines, movement of forms, interpenetrating or ongoing shapes from one direction to another, but always striving for stability and inner integrity.
Reflecting a universal approach to the world, my lines, united into one body, dominate the space of the painting.
The light background is covered with a web of lines and scratches, from which other images arise, partly curly, partly abstract. Religious associations convey a spiritual dimension from the painting.
My style of painting is graphic at its core, characterized by linear drawing. Often deepened into the colorful layer. With a simple combination of lines, I want to get the impression that the picture depicts a person, birds, a flower and other images.
I want my paintings to be perceived as abstract combinations of shapes and colors as well as mystical images, like the works of Kandinsky.
I believe that color is a way of direct appeal to the human soul and painting - a symbol of some higher reality and this visual music, where each sound has a certain color.
As a person who has been walking for a long time, the foundations of spirituality in the modern globalized space.
I'm serious about Jacques Attali's idea of "The Nomads".
I chose the word "nomad" deliberately - says Attali - this concept, in my opinion, not only perfectly characterizes future objects, but it is also a key term for designating the culture of consumption and defining the lifestyle in the future.
"Nomads" - the fourth chapter from Jacques Attali's book "On the Threshold of the New Millennium".
A significant leap into the future will occur if we can visualize the ideas of Jacques Attali in a pictorial context.
My creative search is in line with the ideas of Jacques Attali.
At the heart of these searches is the "Flower of Life", it is referred to as sacred geometry and is sometimes considered to be one of the most important symbols of the earth.
I believe that the time has come for a deep understanding of the flower of life meaning, which keeps a single cultural code of the earth in the world of art history.

Artist Armat Bektas
